doc/README_CONLLU.md, before:

<div align="right"><strong>RuMor: Russian Morphology project</strong></div>
<h2 align="center">Corpuscula: a python NLP library for corpus processing</h2>

## *CoNLL-U* support

The class `Conllu` promotes full *CoNLL-U* format support (including *CoNLL-U
Plus*). The description of *CoNLL-U* format can be found on
[Universal Dependencies](https://universaldependencies.org/format.html)
project site. In ***Corpuscula***, internal representation of *CoNLL-U* file
is in
[*Parsed CoNLL-U*](https://github.com/fostroll/corpuscula/blob/master/doc/README_PARSED_CONLLU.md)
format.

All methods of the class are static. All returning sequences are generators.
Input sequences may be both generators and lists.

### Converting tokenized sentences to *Parsed CoNLL-U*

```python
Conllu.from_sentences(sentences, split_multi=False, adjust_for_speech=False, columns=None)
```
Converts a sequence of tokenized sentences to *Parsed CoNLL-U* format. For every
sentence from **sentences**, the method `Conllu.from_sentence` will be run.
Param **columns** is passed to that method.

Params **split_multi** and **adjust_for_speech** are passed to the method
`Conllu.fix`.

The method returns a sequence of sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format. For
each sentence, *metadata* part contains generated *id* and reconstructed
*text* fields.

```python
Conllu.from_sentence(wforms, columns=None)
```
Converts already tokenized sentence (**wforms** is a list of `str`). Returns
*tokenized sentence* part of *Parsed CoNLL-U* format; *metadata* part won't be
added. All fields of the return will be empty except *ID* and *FORM* fields.
However, if any token contains the symbol `'\u00AD'`, that token will be
splitted, and all parts except the last one will have
`OrderedDict(('SpaceAfter', 'No'))` in the *MISC* field.

By default, the return contains fields of *CoNLL-U* format. If you need any
alternative fields set, you can pass them to the method as a list of `str` via
**columns** param. All non-standard fields will be initialized with `None`.

### Loading *CoNLL-U*

```python
Conllu.load(corpus, encoding='utf-8-sig', fix=True, split_multi=False,
            adjust_for_speech=False, log_file=sys.stderr)
```
**corpus**: a file, a file name or a sequence of text data in *CoNLL-U*
format.

**fix**: need to fix *CoNLL-U* structure while loading.

**split_multi** and **adjust_for_speech**: params to pass to `Conllu.fix`
method. Have no affect if **fix** is `False`.

**log_file**: a stream for progress messages. Default is `sys.stderr`. If
`None`, then output will be suppressed.

Returns sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format

**NB:** For *CoNLL-U Plus* format, the field list must be specified in the first
line of the **corpus** (in the meta variable *global.columns*)

### Save *CoNLL-U*

```python
Conllu.save(corpus, file_path, fix=True, split_multi=False,
            adjust_for_speech=False, log_file=sys.stderr)
```
Saves a **corpus** of *Parsed CoNLL-U* format to *CoNLL-U* file **file_path**.

**fix**: need to fix *CoNLL-U* structure before saving.

**split_multi** and **adjust_for_speech**: params to pass to `Conllu.fix`
method. Have no affect if **fix** is `False`.

**log_file**: a stream for progress messages. Default is `sys.stderr`. If
`None`, then output will be suppressed.

```python
Conllu.get_as_text(corpus, fix=True, split_multi=False,
                   adjust_for_speech=False, log_file=sys.stderr)
```
Converts a **corpus** of *Parsed CoNLL-U* format to text representation of
*CoNLL-U*. All params are equals to the ones of `Conllu.save` method.

Return iterator of `str` lines.

### Fixing *CoNLL-U* structure

```python
Conllu.fix(corpus, split_multi=False, adjust_for_speech=False)
```
If need, restore correct *ID* numeration and adjust sentences' *metadata*.

Params for additional processing:

**split_multi**: if `True`, then wforms with spaces will be processed as
multiword tokens.

**adjust_for_speech**: if `True`, remove all non alphanumeric tokens and
convert all words to lower case. That makes the **corpus** blend in with the
output of speech recognition tools.

Returns sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format

### Merging *CoNLL-U* annotations

Sometimes, we have one corpus tagged independently for different tasks. As
result, we have several copies of the coprus, each with its own annotations.
To merge it in one *CoNLL-U* file, use:
```python
Conllu.merge(corpus1, corpus2, encoding='utf-8-sig', stop_on_error=True,
             log_file=sys.stderr)
```
**corpus1**, **corpus2**: corpora with identical values in the FORM field.
Values in any other fields may be different. Set of fields also don't have to
be equvalent for both corpuses. Result *CoNNL-U* file will include fields from
both of sets.

If param **ignore_new_meta** is `True`, output metadata will be exactly as in
**corpus1**. Metadata of **corpus2** is ignored. Default is `False`.

Param **stop_on_error**: if `True`, the method will raise an error if some
field of any token has non-`None` values in both corpuses and these values are
not equivalent. Note, that non-equivalent values in the FORM field will raise
an error in any case.

**log_file**: a stream for progress messages. Default is `sys.stderr`. If
`None`, then output will be suppressed.

Returns sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format

Commit message:

`columns` param for `Conllu.fix()` method

doc/README_CONLLU.md, after:

<div align="right"><strong>RuMor: Russian Morphology project</strong></div>
<h2 align="center">Corpuscula: a python NLP library for corpus processing</h2>

## *CoNLL-U* support

The class `Conllu` promotes full *CoNLL-U* format support (including *CoNLL-U
Plus*). The description of *CoNLL-U* format can be found on
[Universal Dependencies](https://universaldependencies.org/format.html)
project site. In ***Corpuscula***, internal representation of *CoNLL-U* file
is in
[*Parsed CoNLL-U*](https://github.com/fostroll/corpuscula/blob/master/doc/README_PARSED_CONLLU.md)
format.

All methods of the class are static. All returning sequences are generators.
Input sequences may be both generators and lists.

### Converting tokenized sentences to *Parsed CoNLL-U*

```python
Conllu.from_sentences(sentences, split_multi=False, adjust_for_speech=False,
                      columns=None)
```
Converts a sequence of tokenized sentences to *Parsed CoNLL-U* format. For every
sentence from **sentences**, the method `Conllu.from_sentence` will be run.
Param **columns** is passed to that method.

Params **split_multi** and **adjust_for_speech** are passed to the method
`Conllu.fix`.

The method returns a sequence of sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format. For
each sentence, *metadata* part contains generated *id* and reconstructed
*text* fields.

```python
Conllu.from_sentence(wforms, columns=None)
```
Converts already tokenized sentence (**wforms** is a list of `str`). Returns
*tokenized sentence* part of *Parsed CoNLL-U* format; *metadata* part won't be
added. All fields of the return will be empty except *ID* and *FORM* fields.
However, if any token contains the symbol `'\u00AD'`, that token will be
splitted, and all parts except the last one will have
`OrderedDict(('SpaceAfter', 'No'))` in the *MISC* field.

By default, the return contains fields of *CoNLL-U* format. If you need any
alternative fields set, you can pass them to the method as a list of `str` via
**columns** param. All non-standard fields will be initialized with `None`.

### Loading *CoNLL-U*

```python
Conllu.load(corpus, encoding='utf-8-sig', fix=True, split_multi=False,
            adjust_for_speech=False, log_file=sys.stderr)
```
**corpus**: a file, a file name or a sequence of text data in *CoNLL-U*
format.

**fix**: need to fix *CoNLL-U* structure while loading.

**split_multi** and **adjust_for_speech**: params to pass to `Conllu.fix`
method. Have no affect if **fix** is `False`.

**log_file**: a stream for progress messages. Default is `sys.stderr`. If
`None`, then output will be suppressed.

Returns sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format

**NB:** For *CoNLL-U Plus* format, the field list must be specified in the first
line of the **corpus** (in the meta variable *global.columns*)

### Save *CoNLL-U*

```python
Conllu.save(corpus, file_path, fix=True, split_multi=False,
            adjust_for_speech=False, log_file=sys.stderr)
```
Saves a **corpus** of *Parsed CoNLL-U* format to *CoNLL-U* file **file_path**.

**fix**: need to fix *CoNLL-U* structure before saving.

**split_multi** and **adjust_for_speech**: params to pass to `Conllu.fix`
method. Have no affect if **fix** is `False`.

**log_file**: a stream for progress messages. Default is `sys.stderr`. If
`None`, then output will be suppressed.

```python
Conllu.get_as_text(corpus, fix=True, split_multi=False,
                   adjust_for_speech=False, log_file=sys.stderr)
```
Converts a **corpus** of *Parsed CoNLL-U* format to text representation of
*CoNLL-U*. All params are equals to the ones of `Conllu.save` method.

Return iterator of `str` lines.

### Fixing *CoNLL-U* structure

```python
Conllu.fix(corpus, split_multi=False, adjust_for_speech=False, columns=None)
```
If need, restore correct *ID* numeration and adjust sentences' *metadata*.

Params for additional processing:

**split_multi**: if `True`, then wforms with spaces will be processed as
multiword tokens.

**adjust_for_speech**: if `True`, remove all non alphanumeric tokens and
convert all words to lower case. That makes the **corpus** blend in with the
output of speech recognition tools.

Returns sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format. Each fixed sentence will contain
the same set of fields as the original one. But, if the sentence is empty, the
empty stub sentence will be generated, fields of which are the default fields
of *CoNLL-U* format. If you need any alternative fields set, you can pass them
to the method as a list of `str` via **columns** param. **NB:** This affects
only on empty sentences.

### Merging *CoNLL-U* annotations

Sometimes, we have one corpus tagged independently for different tasks. As
result, we have several copies of the coprus, each with its own annotations.
To merge it in one *CoNLL-U* file, use:
```python
Conllu.merge(corpus1, corpus2, encoding='utf-8-sig', stop_on_error=True,
             log_file=sys.stderr)
```
**corpus1**, **corpus2**: corpora with identical values in the FORM field.
Values in any other fields may be different. Set of fields also don't have to
be equvalent for both corpuses. Result *CoNNL-U* file will include fields from
both of sets.

If param **ignore_new_meta** is `True`, output metadata will be exactly as in
**corpus1**. Metadata of **corpus2** is ignored. Default is `False`.

Param **stop_on_error**: if `True`, the method will raise an error if some
field of any token has non-`None` values in both corpuses and these values are
not equivalent. Note, that non-equivalent values in the FORM field will raise
an error in any case.

**log_file**: a stream for progress messages. Default is `sys.stderr`. If
`None`, then output will be suppressed.

Returns sentences in *Parsed CoNLL-U* format
